Course
ICSI486
Software
Construction
Week 13
Microservices
& Docker Compose
Breaking the Monolith
Instructor
Batnyam Battulga, Ph.D.
Spring 2026

Review – Week 12
Containers vs. Virtual Machines
Understanding Lightweight vs. Heavyweight virtualization architectures.
Infrastructure as Code
Using the Dockerfile to define environment blueprints.
Build & Run Workflow
Creating images with docker build and instantiating with docker run.
Port Mapping
Using -p 8080:8080 to bridge the isolated container to the host.
ICSI486 Software Construction 2

Learning Objectives
The Scaling Problem
Limitations of the Monolithic architecture.
Microservices Architecture
Principles and benefits of decoupling.
Service Communication
How independent services talk via REST APIs.
Docker Compose
Managing multi-container applications with YAML.
Networking
How containers resolve each other's addresses internally.
ICSI486 Software Construction 3

The Monolithic Architecture
One Big Artifact
LibraryWeb.war
All modules (UI, Books, Users, Auth, DB Connection) are compiled into one single .war file.
UI Layer
Unified Deployment Auth
Deployed as a single atomic unit. You cannot deploy just the
Books Logic
UI or just the Backend separately.
Users Logic
Inefficient Scaling
DB Access
Scaled by duplicating the entire application stack, even if only one module needs more resources.
ICSI486 Software Construction 4

When the Monolith Fails
Agility & Deployment Risks
A minor UI bug fix requires rebuilding and redeploying the entire core application logic.
Inefficient Scaling
Heavy load on "Book Search" forces scaling the whole app, wasting RAM on unused UI/User modules.
Team Friction
50 developers merging changes into a single Git repository creates conflict and chaos.
ICSI486 Software Construction 5

Microservices Architecture
Decomposition:
Break the application into small, loosely coupled, independently deployable services.
Business Capabilities:
Organized around specific business domains rather than technical layers.
Database per Service:
Each service manages its own data storage to ensure loose coupling.
Figure 1: The Microservice approach - Decoupling components for independent scaling
ICSI486 Software Construction 6

Advantages of Microservices
Independent Deployments
Update the UI instantly without touching the Database or Core logic.
Targeted Scaling
Run 10 instances of the Book Service, but only 1 instance of the Admin UI.
Polyglot Programming
Use the best tool for the job: UI in Node.js, Core in Java, AI-Search in Python.
ICSI486 Software Construction 7

Trade-offs (The Pain of Distributed Systems)
Microservices are not a silver bullet!
Complexity Explosion:
You replaced simple in-memory method calls with unreliable network calls.
Latency & Failure:
Network communication is inherently slower than local execution and will fail unexpectedly.
Data Consistency Nightmares:
No foreign keys across different databases. Distributed transactions (Sagas) are hard to implement.
ICSI486 Software Construction 8

Deconstructing LibraryWeb
Target Architecture for Sprint 14
User Service Handles Authentication and User
Profiles (API).
Book Service Handles Book CRUD operations (API).
Frontend UI Lightweight web server rendering HTML, calling the APIs.
ICSI486 Software Construction 9

How do they talk- REST!
Synchronous Communication
Services communicate directly over HTTP where the caller waits for a response.
The Request Flow
Frontend needs data and sends a GET /api/books request to the Book Service.
Service Processing
The Book Service queries its private database and returns raw JSON data.
Client-Side Rendering
The Frontend receives the JSON, parses it, and dynamically builds the HTML.
ICSI486 Software Construction 10

The Multiple Container Problem user@dev-machine:~/library-project
$docker run -d –p 8081:8080 –name user-svc user-image
$docker run -d –p 8082:8080 –name book-svc book-image
$docker run -d –p 80:8080 –name frontend frontend-image
Manual Docker is tedious and error-prone!
Hard to manage, start, stop, and wire networking connections by hand.
ICSI486 Software Construction 11

Enter Docker Compose
Multi-Container Orchestration A powerful tool for defining and running multi- container Docker applications seamlessly.
Single Configuration File Uses a single YAML file (docker-compose.yml) to configure all application services, networks, and volumes.
One-Command Startup Start your entire application stack, including database and frontend, with one command: docker-compose up.
ICSI486 Software Construction 12

YAML Syntax Basics
YAML Ain't Markup Language config.yml
A human-readable data serialization language. It is cleaner than XML or JSON and is the standard for configuration files.
server:
port:8080# Numerical value host:localhost# String value
Indentation Matters!
features:
Y
YAML relies on indentation to denote structure. Use spaces, -login# List item 1
NOT tabs. A single tab character can break your entire
-search# List item 2 configuration.
ICSI486 Software Construction 13

docker-compose.yml Structure version:
The Compose file format version (e.g., '3.8').
services:
Defines the containers (your apps, databases) and their configurations.
volumes:
Defines persistent data storage for data that needs to survive restarts.
networks:
Defines isolated communication channels between specific services.
ICSI486 Software Construction 14

Defining a Service
The Build Context
The buildkey tells Compose where to find the Dockerfile. It will automatically build the image from source before running it.
docker-compose.yml services:
Port Mapping book-service:# Name of the service
Maps the Host Port (8082) to the Container Port (8080). This allows build:./book-service-folder you to access different services on different local ports (e.g., ports:
localhost:8082).
-"8082:8080"# Host:Container environment:
-DB_URL=jdbc:h2:mem:books
Environment Variables
Injects configuration settings directly into the container at runtime.
Perfect for database URLs, API keys, or feature flags.
ICSI486 Software Construction 15

Docker Compose Networking (Magic!)
Internal DNS Resolution
Compose automatically creates a virtual network for your services, assigning each container an internal IP.
Service Discovery by Name
Containers can talk to each other using their Service Name as the hostname. No IPs needed!
Example Scenario
Frontend wants books- It calls:
http://book-service:8080/api/books
No Hardcoding Required
Never hardcode IP addresses again. The internal DNS handles dynamic IP assignment automatically.
ICSI486 Software Construction 16

Database as a Service docker-compose.yml
Beyond In-Memory
We don't need H2 in-memory databases anymore. They are services:
great for quick tests but lose data on restart. It's time to use a db:
real, persistent database engine for our microservices.
image:postgres:15 ports:
-"5432:5432" environment:
Instant Postgres
POSTGRES_USER:admin
POSTGRES_PASSWORD:secretpassword
Instead of installing PostgreSQL on your laptop, we simply add volumes:
a container definition to our Compose file. Docker pulls the official image and runs an enterprise-grade DB in seconds. -pg-data:/var/lib/postgresql/data # We now have a running DB server!
ICSI486 Software Construction 17

depends_on (Startup Order)
The Startup Race Condition docker-compose.yml
By default, Docker Compose starts all services simultaneously.
services:
If your app starts faster than the database, the connection fails, and the container crashes.
book-service:
image:my-java-app:v1 depends_on:# Critical!
Enforcing Order -db# Wait for DB container
D
The depends_ondirective solves this by telling Compose to start the dependency (database) first and wait for it to be created db:
before starting the dependent service (app).
image:postgres:15
ICSI486 Software Construction 18

Environment Variables & Secrets
Security First
.env
Never hardcode passwords, API keys, or tokens directly in docker- compose.yml. If you commit this file to GitHub, your secrets DB_PASS=supersecret123 public knowledge immediately.
API_KEY=ab83hs92js02
The .env Solution docker-compose.yml
Create a hidden file named .env in your project root. Docker
Compose automatically looks for this file and loads variables into the build context.
services:
db:
image:postgres:15 environment:
Git Ignore (Crucial!)
POSTGRES_PASSWORD:${DB_PASS}
You MUST add .env to your .gitignorefile. This ensures the template # Variable substitution works for everyone, but the secrets stay on your local machine only.
ICSI486 Software Construction 19

Useful Compose Commands
Start all services in background
$docker-compose up -d
Creates and starts containers as defined in YAML. "-d" runs in detached mode.
Stop and remove everything
$docker-compose down
Stops containers and removes containers, networks, volumes, and images created by `up`.
Follow logs of all services
$docker-compose logs -f
Aggregates output from all running containers into a single stream.
List running services
$docker-compose ps
Shows the status (Up/Exit), ports, and names of containers in the current project.
ICSI486 Software Construction 20

Fallacies of Distributed Computing
False Assumptions Developers Make
The network is reliable. Latency is zero.
Packets get lost; connections drop. Calls take time; distance matters.
Bandwidth is infinite. The network is secure.
Data limits exist; congestion happens. Assume it is compromised.
Design your services to handle failures gracefully.
Implement Retries, Timeouts, and Circuit Breakers.
ICSI486 Software Construction 21

API Gateways (Brief Outlook)
Single Entry Point:
Clients (Mobile, Web) communicate only with the Gateway, not individual services.
User Service
/api/users
Intelligent Routing:
Mobile App API Gateway
Routes requests like /api/users to the User
Client Port 80/443
Service and /api/books to the Book Service.
Book Service
/api/books
Abstraction & Security:
Hides internal architecture (IPs/Ports) and centralizes authentication.
Figure 2: The Gateway acts as a "Hotel Concierge" routing requests
ICSI486 Software Construction 22

The Polyglot Future
High-Performance Calculation
Use Rust or C++ for computationally intensive tasks.
Rapid API Development
Use Node.js or Go for lightweight, fast services.
Enterprise Business Logic
Use Java or Spring for complex domain models.
Docker Compose is Agnostic
It simply runs containers; it doesn't care about the language inside.
ICSI486 Software Construction 23

Summary
Scalability Architecture
Monoliths hinder scaling; Microservices allow targeted scaling but introduce distributed system complexity.
Communication
Independent services communicate over the network using standard protocols like REST/JSON.
Orchestration
Docker Compose manages multi-container applications seamlessly using a single declarative YAML file.
Service Discovery
Internal DNS resolution allows containers to talk to each other by service name, removing the need for IP management.
ICSI486 Software Construction 24

Q&A & Lab Mission
SPRINT 14
Lab Mission
Deconstruct the LibraryWeb Monolith
Step 1: Split the monolith into User Service and Book Service.
Questions-
Step 2: Create a separate Frontend that consumes the JSON APIs.
Ask me anything about
Step 3: Author the docker-compose.yml to orchestrate all
Docker or Microservices containers.
Goal: Run the full stack with one command!
ICSI486 Software Construction 25
