National University of Mongolia
Department of Information & Computer Science
ICSI486 | Software Construction
Modern Interfaces
RESTful APIs & JSON
Instructor
Batnyam Battulga, Ph.D.
Dipl.-Ing., Dipl.-Inf.

ICSI486 Week 10
Learning Objectives
Understand REST principles
Master the fundamental constraints and architectural style of RESTful services, including correct usage of HTTP verbs.
Design Resource-Oriented Endpoints
Learn to structure URLs around nouns (resources) rather than verbs (actions) for a cleaner API design.
Produce and Consume JSON
Utilize the Google Gson library to serialize Java objects into JSON format and deserialize incoming data.
Handle HTTP Status Codes
Goal: REST Adapter
Return semantic status codes (200, 201, 404, 500) and structured JSON error messages instead of HTML pages. By the end of this lecture, you will add a fully functional REST API adapter to our Hexagonal Architecture.
Test & Implement
Verify endpoints using Postman/cURL and implement the ThesisRestController adapter without modifying the core domain.
Slide 2

ICSI486 Week 10
Recap: Where are we-
Today's Mission
So Far Today
Domain Core & Ports
New Adapter: REST API
The Hexagon. Business logic is isolated and stable.
Adding a machine-readable interface for external systems.
Implemented Adapters
Key Deliverables
1. Swing UI
JSON Data Format
2. HTML/JSP Web
/api/theses(CRUD)
Core stays untouched!
Functional Monolith
Slide 3

ICSI486 Week 10
The Hexagonal Triumph
NEW TODAY
Adapter 3
REST DAoPmI ain
Core
JSON HTTP
ThesisService
Machine-readable interface. Does not change logiRcE.MAINS
UNTOUCHED
Slide 4

ICSI486 Week 10
What is an API-
Application Programming Interface
It stands for Application Programming Interface. It defines how software components should interact.
The Waiter Analogy
A Contract Between Systems
Essentially a formal contract between two software systems. It specifies the Guest (Client):You order form the menu.
request format and guaranteed response structure.
The Interaction Flow Waiter (API):Takes order to kitchen & brings food.
Client (Requests) API (Processes) Server (Responds)
Kitchen (Server):Prepares the meal (Data).
Slide 5

ICSI486 Week 10
Evolution of Web Services
2010s - Present
REST & JSON
1990s
Representational State Transfer
RPC
Remote Procedure Call Lightweight, flexible, resource-based.
The modern standard for mobile and
Tightly coupled execution. Functions web APIs.
called on remote servers as if they were local.
Industry Standard
2000s
SOAP & XML
Simple Object Access Protocol
Heavyweight, strict standards.
Enterprise favorite but complex
(WSDL, excessive XML tags).
Slide 6

ICSI486 Week 10
What is REST-
Origin Story (2000)
Introduced by Roy Fielding in his doctoral dissertation. It defined how the web should work at scale.
Architectural Style, Not Protocol
Unlike SOAP, REST is not a rigid protocol. It is a set of design constraints and principles for distributed systems.
Representational State Transfer
Uses Standard HTTP
REST leverages the full potential of HTTP standards (URIs, methods, "Software architecture that relies on a stateless, client-server, cacheable communications protocol." headers, status codes) rather than fighting against them.
Slide 7

ICSI486 Week 10
The 6 REST Constraints
1. Client-Server
Strict separation of concerns. The UI (Client) is independent of Data Storage (Server), allowing them to evolve separately.
2. Stateless
The server stores no client context. Every request must contain all necessary information (e.g., auth tokens) to be understood.
3. Cacheable
Responses must define themselves as cacheable or not. This prevents clients from reusing stale data and improves performance.
4. Uniform Interface
Roy Fielding's Rules
The core distinction. Architecture is simplified and decoupled through standard resources (URIs) and standard verbs (GET, POST). To be truly "RESTful", an API must strictly adhere to these architectural constraints.
5. Layered System
The client cannot tell if it is connected directly to the end server or an intermediary (like a load balancer or Focus for Lab 10:
proxy).
Statelessness & Uniform Interface
6. Code on Demand (Optional)
Servers can temporarily extend or customize client functionality by transferring executable code (e.g., JavaScript applets).
Slide 8

ICSI486 Week 10
Constraint: Statelessness
No Server Memory
Stateful vs. Stateless
No client context is stored on the server between requests. The server does not remember previous interactions.
GET /thesis/5
Self-Contained Requests
POST /thesis (Token)
Every request must contain all necessary information to be understood (e.g., authentication tokens, user IDs, resource details).
Wrong (Stateful):
"Hey Server, remember I logged in-"
Scalability Benefit
Correct (Stateless):
Since any server can handle any request without needing prior context, horizontal "Hey Server, here is my token proving I am logged in." scaling becomes trivial.
Slide 9

ICSI486 Week 10
The Uniform Interface - Resources
1 The Collection Resource
Think in Nouns
GET https://api.university.com /theses
In REST, the focus is on Resources (things), not
Actions (verbs). A URL is an address to a thing, not a
Returns a Listof all theses.
command to do something.
Resource = Noun 2 The Single Document Resource
Users, Theses, Products, Orders
GET https://api.university.com /theses /5
Avoid Verbs in URL getTheses, createUser, deleteItem
Use HTTP Methods (GET, POST) for actions instead!
Returns one specificthesis with ID 5.
Slide 10

ICSI486 Week 10
Good vs. Bad API Endpoints
RPC Style (Bad) REST Style (Good)
Focus on Actions (Verbs) Focus on Resources (Nouns)
/createThesis Verb Collection Resource
/api/theses
/deleteThesis-id=5 Query Param
VS Single Document Resource
/api/theses/5
/updateScore Verb
Why it's good:The URL stays clean. The action (Create, Read, Update, Delete) is determined by the HTTP Verb (POST, GET, PUT, DELETE).
Why it's bad: URLs should identify resources, not the actions performed on them. Actions are defined by HTTP methods.
Slide 11

ICSI486 Week 10
HTTP Methods (The CRUD Mapping)
CRUD Operations HTTP Verbs
Database Perspective REST API Perspective
POST
Create INSERT Not Safe
GET
Read SELECT Safe
Update UPDATE PUT / PATCH Idempotent (PUT)
DELETE
Delete DELETE Idempotent
Slide 12

ICSI486 Week 10
Deep Dive: GET
Purpose: Read Data
Used exclusively to retrieve resource representations. It serves as the "Read" operation in CRUD (e.g., fetching a list of theses).
Property: Safe
GET requests are read-only and have no side effects. They do not modify the server state or alter the database.
Property: Idempotent
Calling the endpoint once or 100 times yields the same state on the server. Repeating the
HTTP GET request is harmless.
Safe Idempotent
Server-Side Behavior
"The server has no memory of previous GET requests.
Typically maps to SQL SELECTqueries. Responses are often cacheable by browsers to improve
Each request stands alone." performance.
Slide 13

ICSI486 Week 10
Deep Dive: POST
Purpose: Create a New Resource
The fundamental purpose of POST is to submit an entity to the specified resource, often causing a change in state or side effects on the server (e.g., creating a new Thesis).
Property: Not Safe
Unlike GET, POST requests are not safe because they are intended to modify the server's state (create, update, or process data).
Property: Not Idempotent
Create Operation
Calling POST multiple times creates multiple resources. If you send the same request 5 times, you might Maps to SQL INSERT end up with 5 identical entries in the database.
POST /api/theses HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: application/json
Payload: Request Body
{
Data is sent securely within the request body (usually as JSON), not in the URL parameters. "title": "REST API Design" This allows for complex and large data structures. } Slide 14

ICSI486 Week 10
Deep Dive: PUT vs. PATCH
PUT: Full Replacement
Replaces the entire resource at the target URL with the request payload.
Warning: If you omit a field in the JSON body, it is typically considered "null" or removed from the database. The Difference PUT /theses/1 PATCH: Partial Modification {"title": "New"} Applies partial updates to the resource.
Deletes other fields!
Benefit: Send only the fields that changed (e.g., just {"score": 95}). The rest of the object stays untouched.
PATCH /theses/1
Idempotency check
{"score": 90}
PUT is idempotent (State is constant no matter how many times you call it). PATCHis not
Keeps title, etc.
necessarily idempotent (though usually implemented that way).
Slide 15

ICSI486 Week 10
Deep Dive: DELETE
Purpose: Remove a Resource
The DELETE method requests that the origin server remove the association between the target resource and its current functionality.
Property: Idempotent
DELETE is idempotent. Making multiple identical requests ends up having the same result as a single request.
Request Example
Note:Calling DELETE on ID 5 once removes it (200 OK / 204 No Content). Calling it again yields the same system state (even if the second response is 404 Not Found).
DELETE /api/theses/5 HTTP/1.1
Host: university.edu
Common Responses
Authorization: Bearer...
Typically returns 204 No Content (success, no body) or 200 OK if the response includes a body describing the action.
Server Response:
HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
Slide 16

ICSI486 Week 10
Richardson Maturity Model
What is it-
LAB TARGET
A model developed by Leonard Richardson that breaks down the principal elements of HTTP Verbs a REST approach into steps.
2 Use GET, POST, PUT, DELETE correctly.
200 OK 404 Not Found
Our Goal: Level 2
Resources
For this course and most modern web
1
Individual URIs for distinct things.
APIs, Level 2 is the standard. It balances pragmatic design with RESTful principles. /api/theses/5 Increasing Maturity 0 Slide 17

ICSI486 Week 10
Communication - How APIs talk back
The Universal Language
HTTP Status Codes provide a standardized way for web servers to communicate the outcome of a request to the client, regardless of the programming language used.
404
The "Waiter" Metaphor
Think of the API as a waiter. When they return from the kitchen (Server), they don't just bring food (Data); they also tell you if the order was successful or if the steak is out of stock (Status Code).
200
Machine Readability
Unlike HTML error pages designed for humans, 3-digit status codes allow your software
Status Codes adapters (Swing, Android) to react programmatically to success or failure.
The contract between Client and Server regarding the
The 3-Digit Structure result of an operation.
Every response contains a 3-digit integer. The first digit defines the class of the response (e.g., 2xx for Success, 4xx for Client Error).
Slide 18

ICSI486 Week 10
HTTP 2xx Family (Success)
CODE 200
OK
The standard response for successful HTTP requests. The actual payload depends on the request method (e.g., GET returns the resource, POST returns the action result).
CODE 201
Created
The request has been fulfilled and resulted in a new resource being created.
"It worked!"
Typically the response to a POST request (e.g., creating a new Thesis).
The 2xx class communicates success. If you
CODE 204 see green, your API call went through perfectly.
No Content
The server successfully processed the request but is not returning any content.
This is the standard response for a successful DELETE operation.
Slide 19

ICSI486 Week 10
HTTP 4xx Family (Client Errors)
400 Bad Request
General client error. The server cannot process the request due to a client error (e.g., malformed request syntax, invalid message framing, or deceptive request routing).
{"error": "Invalid JSON format"}
401 Unauthorized
Authentication is required and has failed or has not been provided. Think of it as
"Unauthenticated".
Login required
403 Forbidden
The server understands the request but refuses to authorize it. Unlike 401, re-authenticating won't make a difference. "It's You, Not Me" No permission (e.g., Admin only) 4xx errors indicate that the fault lies with the sender (the Client). The request contains bad syntax or 404 Not Found cannot be fulfilled.
The requested resource could not be found but may be available in the future. The most famous web error.
Invalid ID / Resource missing
Slide 20

ICSI486 Week 10
HTTP 5xx Family (Server Errors)
500 Internal Server Error
The generic "catch-all" error. This usually indicates a bug in the backend code, such as an unhandled NullPointerException or a logic failure.
503 Service Unavailable
The server is not ready to handle the request. Common causes include the database being down, the server being overloaded, or maintenance downtime.
"It's not you, it's me"
Developer Responsibility
Unlike 4xx errors, 5xx errors indicate the server failed to fulfill a valid request.
A 5xx error means we made a mistake. Our goal is to use robust try-catch blocks to prevent these and return meaningful 4xx errors instead.
try { ... } catch
Slide 21

ICSI486 Week 10
Data Format: Why JSON-
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)
A text-based data interchange format derived from JavaScript object syntax, but now a standalone standard.
Extremely Lightweight
Minimal syntax overhead compared to XML. Less bandwidth usage makes it ideal for mobile networks and high-performance APIs.
JSON
Language Independent
Despite the name, JSON is supported by virtually every modern programming language (Java,
Python, C#, etc.).
{
"id": 1,
Human Readable "format": "json",
"isCool": true
Easy to read and write for humans. Simple structure: key-value pairs and ordered lists }
(arrays).
Slide 22

ICSI486 Week 10
JSON vs. XML
XML JSON
Extensible Markup Language JavaScript Object Notation
<thesis> {
<id>5</id> "id": 5,
<title>REST API</title> "title": "REST API"
</thesis> }
VS
Heavyweight Tags Lightweight Syntax
Opening and closing tags repeat the key names, doubling size. Map/Key-Value based. No redundant closing tags.
Complex Parsing Mobile Optimized
Requires DOM or SAX parsers, which are CPU intensive. Smaller payload size means faster transmission over 4G/5G.
Slide 23

ICSI486 Week 10
JSON Syntax Rules
Structure & Types thesis_data.json
JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) is built on two structures: a collection of name/value pairs and an ordered list of values. 1 { 2 "id":101, // Number: No quotes 3 "title":"RESTful API Design", // String: Double quotes Objects {} 4 "isPublished":true, // Boolean: true/false Unordered sets of key/value pairs. Enclosed in curly braces.
5 "score":95.5,
6 "tags":[ // Array: Ordered list []
7 "api",
Arrays
[] 8 "json",
Ordered lists of values. Enclosed in square brackets.
9 "web"
10 ],
11 "author":{ // Object: Key/Value pairs {}
Strings
""
12 "name":"Batnyam B.",
Must be enclosed in double quotes. Keys are always strings.
13 "verified":true
14 }
15 }
Numbers & Booleans
#
No quotes for numbers (integer/float) or true/false.
Unlike JS, trailing commas are usually not allowedin standard JSON.
Slide 24

ICSI486 Week 10
Serialization in Java
Serialization is the process of converting a Java Object (in-memory) into a data format
(JSON String) suitable for transmission. Deserialization is the reverse process.
Java Object JSON String
ThesisDTO.java network_payload
Serialization public class ThesisDTO { { private int id = 101; "id": 101, private String title = "REST"; "title": "REST", private Boolean active = true; "active": true } } Deserialization Lives in RAM (Heap Memory) Transmitted over HTTP (Text) Why- You cannot send a Java Object over the internet directly. It must be flattened into text.
Slide 25

ICSI486 Week 10
Popular Java JSON Libraries
Google Gson Jackson
Lightweight & Simple Enterprise Standard
Zero dependencies (Single JAR) Built into Spring Boot
Easy setup (No config needed) High performance & Streaming API
Compact footprint Extensive annotation support
VS
Instantiation: Instantiation:
Gson gson = new Gson(); ObjectMapper m = new ObjectMapper();
Best for:Simple Servlets, Android apps, and quick prototypes where setup Best for:Large enterprise systems, Spring applications, and handling speed matters. complex object mappings.
Slide 26

ICSI486 Week 10
Using Google Gson
ThesisRestController.java
Java to JSON Serialization import com.google.gson.Gson ;
Converting a Java object graph into a JSON string is called serialization.
// ... inside your doGet() method
With the Gson library, this complex process is reduced to just two lines of code.
// 1. Retrieve data (Core Domain)
ThesisDTO thesis = new ThesisDTO (
Instantiate Gson
1
101,
Create a new Gsoninstance. You typically only need one per application (singleton). "Modern RESTful Architectures" , 95.5 ); Call toJson() 2 // 2. Instantiate Gson Library Pass your Java object (DTO, Entity, List) to the toJson() method. Gson gson = new Gson (); // 3. Serialize Object to JSON String String jsonString = gson. toJson ( thesis ); Result 3 // 4. Debug Output You receive a standard JSON Stringready to be written to the HTTP response. System . out . println ( jsonString ); /* Output:
* {"id":101,"title":"Modern RESTful Architectures","score":95.5}
Note:Gson automatically handles nested objects and arrays.
You don't need to manually iterate through lists! */
Slide 27

ICSI486 Week 10
HTTP Headers (The Content-Type)
ThesisServlet.java
1 protected void doGet( HttpServletRequest req , HttpServletResponse res )
Setting the Metadata
{
2
Before sending the actual JSON data, you must tell the client (browser or app) how to interpret the response stream. 3 // 1. Set the Content-Type header 4 // Crucial! Otherwise, browser might treat it as text/html 5 res . setContentType ( "application/json" ) ; MIME Type 6 application/json 7 // 2. Set Character Encoding to UTF-8 Tells the browser: "This is data, not a webpage." 8 res . setCharacterEncoding ( "UTF-8" ) ; 9 10 // 3. Convert Object to JSON String (using Gson) Character Encoding String jsonStr1in1g =this . gson. toJson ( thesisList ) ; UTF-8 12 Crucial for supporting international characters (e.g., 13 // 4. Write to response stream Mongolian Cyrillic).
14 PrintWriter out =res . getWriter ( ) ;
15 out . print ( jsonString ) ;
16 out . flush ( ) ;
Client Parsing 17 }
Correct headers trigger automatic JSON parsing in tools like fetch()or axios.
Always set headers beforeobtaining the PrintWriter!
Slide 28

ICSI486 Week 10
Error Handling in our API
Stop Sending HTML!
When an API fails, it must speak the client's language (JSON). Default web response_404.json server error pages break mobile apps and frontend parsers.
1 {
No HTML Pages 2 "timestamp":"2026-03-20T10:15:30Z",
A mobile app cannot display a Tomcat 404 HTML page. It 3 "status":404, // Explicit status code expects a data structure.
4 "error":"Not Found",
5 "message":"Thesis with ID 999 does not exist",
6 "path":"/api/theses/999"
Consistent Schema
7 }
Always return the same error fields: status, error, message.
Implementation Tip
Match Headers Create a Java class ApiError.java(DTO) and use Gson to serialize it whenever an exception is caught in your controller.
The HTTP Status code in the header (e.g., 404) must match the JSON body content.
Slide 29

ICSI486 Week 10
Testing APIs: Postman & cURL
11 Postman (GUI)Visual
Beyond the Browser Params Auth Body
POST http://localhost:8080/api/theses SEND
Browsers are optimized for GET (viewing pages). To fully test a REST API (create, update,
{ delete), you need specialized tools to send "title": "RESTful Architectures",
"student": "Batnyam Battulga"
JSON payloads and manipulate HTTP methods. }
Browsers
Good for simple GET requests. Hard to send POST bodies or 2 cURL (Terminal)Command Line headers without JavaScript.
user@macbook:
~
GUI Tools (Postman/Insomnia)
$curl -X POST\
User-friendly interface to build requests, save collections, and view formatted JSON responses.
-H "Content-Type: application/json"\
-d '{"title":"New Thesis"}' \
CLI Tools (cURL) http://localhost:8080/api/theses
Command-line standard. Great for quick tests, scripting, and server-side debugging. # Returns: {"id": 10, "status": "created"} Slide 30

ICSI486 Week 10
Summary & Lab 10 Mission
Lab Assignment
Lab 10: The REST Adapter
Key Takeaways
Your mission, should you choose to accept it, is to expose the Thesis Management
Resource-Based System to the world.
REST uses Nouns (URLs), not Verbs. Design your API around your domain entities. Objectives
Create ThesisRestControllerclass
Implement GET (List & Single), POST, DELETE
HTTP Verbs Context
Use Gson for serialization
Use methods correctly: GET (Safe), POST (Create),
Do NOT modify ThesisService!
PUT/PATCH (Update), DELETE (Remove).
JSON & Status Codes
Postman Tomcat
Communicate via lightweight JSON and standard HTTP status codes (2xx, 4xx, 5xx).
Open IDE
Slide 31
